Nmap (Network Mapper)

Nmap is a powerful open-source network scanning tool used to discover hosts and services on a computer network, creating a "map" of the network. It's designed to be flexible and efficient, providing a variety of scanning techniques for network exploration and security auditing.
Key Features:

    Host Discovery:
        Nmap can discover hosts on a network using various techniques, such as ICMP echo requests, TCP and UDP scanning, and ARP requests.

    Port Scanning:
        Nmap can scan for open ports on a target host, providing information about the services running on those ports.
        Techniques include TCP connect scanning, SYN/ACK scanning, UDP scanning, and more.

    Service Version Detection:
        Nmap can attempt to determine the version of services running on open ports. This helps in identifying vulnerabilities associated with specific software versions.

    OS Fingerprinting:
        Nmap can attempt to identify the operating system of the target host by analyzing responses to various network probes.

    Scriptable Interaction:
        Nmap has a scripting engine (Nmap Scripting Engine - NSE) that allows users to write and run scripts to automate tasks and gather additional information during scanning.

    Output Formats:
        Nmap supports various output formats, including plain text, XML, and grepable output. This flexibility allows users to analyze results in different ways.

    Aggressive Scanning Options:
        Nmap offers aggressive scanning options (-A) that combine various techniques to gather more information about the target, including service versions, script scanning, and traceroute.

    Stealth Scanning:
        Nmap provides options for stealthy scanning, such as SYN scan, to reduce the chance of detection by intrusion detection systems.

    Timing and Performance Options:
        Users can control the timing and performance of scans to balance thoroughness and speed.

Basic Usage:

Simple Scan:

bash

nmap target_ip

Scan Specific Ports:

bash

nmap -p 80,443 target_ip

Aggressive Scan with Service Version Detection:

bash

nmap -A target_ip

OS Fingerprinting:

bash

    nmap -O target_ip

Examples:

    Discover Hosts on a Network:

    bash

nmap -sn 192.168.1.0/24

Scan Top 1000 Ports:

bash

nmap target_ip

Scan All TCP Ports:

bash

nmap -p- target_ip

Scan UDP Ports:

bash

    nmap -sU target_ip

